---
title: 'The Handover rule'
date: 2025-01-16 00:00:00 -07:00
permalink: "/posts/2025/01/handover/"
tags:
- Consensus
header:
  teaser: "/images/crown.jpeg"
  overlay_image: "/images/crown.jpeg"
  overlay_filter: rgba(0, 100, 100, 0.8)
excerpt: The importance and unimportance of the third phase of HotStuff
category:
- tutorial
---
# The Handover rule

The most tricky part of in Consensus protocols for [Partial Synchrony](https://malkhi.com/posts/2025/01/models/) is the handover from one leader to the next. Over the years, Consensus research exhibited handover sub-protocols with [unnecessary communication complexity](https://decentralizedthoughts.github.io/2023-04-01-hotstuff-2/), [misconceptions](https://malkhi.com/posts/2016/08/flexible-paxos/), and [mistakes](https://malkhi.com/posts/2017/12/bft-broken).

What is the leader handover problem?

Solutions in Partial Synchrony follow a common template. 
They operate in a view-by-view manner, each view driven by a known leader. 
If the leader is honest, then the view is successful
and the protocol terminates.

If the view expires, then the leader is replaced via a handover sub-protocol.
The handover must guarantee that if a **commit** decision was reached by any Honest Validator in the previous view, then the next leader learns the committed value. This is achieved through a **commit-lock** paradigm: $2f+1$ Validators must hold a **lock** on a value before it can be committed. 
In another post, we describe [VPCBC, a linear implementation of commit-lock](https://malkhi.com/posts/2025/01/vpcbc/).

The crux of the handover is for the next leader to learn whether it is possible for $2f+1$ to have a lock. For many years, handover was handled via an approach pioneered in PBFT:

> [PBFT](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:221599614) and [Tendermint](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:59082906) achieved this goal via gossip communication: all Validators must receive excatly the same $2f+1$ messages that the leader received and apply the same justification logic to accept the leader proposal. This requires quadratic word-Communication.
> Faced with a cascade of failures, this incurs super-quadratic (up to cubic) communication
    complexity which is sub-optimal.


[HotStuff  by Yin, Malkhi, Reiter, Abraham and Gueta](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:197644531) pioneered a different approach, which allowed a linear implementation in the Partial Synchrony setting by utilizing 3-phase VPCBC.  The gist of the new approach is encapsulated by the following handover rule:

>**The Handover rule:**  When a leader starts a new view, it must learn the latest lock which is held by any Honest Validator. Validators will accept a leader proposal conditioned on it extending the highest lock they know.

The nice thing about this encapsulation is that [different Consensus protocols can be derived](https://malkhi.com/posts/2025/01/hs-from-vpcbc/) by concatenating a leader replacement which satisfies the Handover rule with VPCBC.  
There are different materializations of the rule in different settings, as summarized in the table below.

| VPCBC phases | Model | Leader protocol to start a new view | Linear? |  
|--- | ---- | ----- | 
| 3-phase | Partial Synchrony | Wait to receive a QC from $2f+1$ Validators. | yes | 
| 3-phase | Synchronous setting | Wait to receive a QC from $2f+1$ Validators. | yes | 
| 2-phase | Partial Synchrony | Wait for one of three conditions: <br> 1. receive QC from the immediately preceding view.<br> 2. receive a QC from **all** the Validators <br> 3. $\Delta$ elapse since all Validators exited the previous view | yes  |

The evolution of this rule has been somewhat peculiar, alternating importance and unimportance of the third phase of HotStuff.

#### Enter 3-phases.

First, HotStuff implemented the Handover rule by adding one phase to the core [VPCBC primitive](https://malkhi.com/posts/2025/01/vpcbc/). 
A 3-phase VPCBC guarantees that if any Honest Validator holds a lock in a view, then $2f+1$ Validators hold a QC (a "key") on it. 
In HotStuff, the next leader simply waits to receive the highest QC from $2f+1$ Validators. 
This guarantees Handover completion: if a lock is held by any Honest Validator, it will learn the QC for it.
This simple handover procedure can be implemented with linear communication complexity. 
It led to the first communication-optimal Consensus solution for Partial Synchrony.

#### Enter asynchrony.

VABA by Abraham, Malkhi and Spiegelman](https://malkhi.com/posts/2025/01/from-hs-to-vaba/) harness the three-phase HotStuff solution to reach the first communication-optimal Validated Byzantine Agreement protocol in [**Asynchronous Setting**](https://malkhi.com/posts/2025/01/models/). The core idea is that handover does not rely on timers, hence it can be utilized in asynchrony. 
    
VABA borrows the template of Consensus solutions in 
Partial Synchrony and operates in a view-by-view manner, each view driven by a leader. 
VABA implements leader handover exactly the same as HotStuff: the next leader only waits to receive the highest QC from $2f+1$ Validators, without any timers. The twist is that VABA operates $n$ handovers in parallel, in order to randomize (in retrospect) leader election. The linearity of the handover regime is crucial, acheiving optimal $n \times O(n)$ communication complexity.

#### Revisiting three phases.

[Malkhi and Nayak revisit in HotStuff-2](https://malkhi.com/posts/2023/03/hs2/) the  third phase in Partial Synchrony. Remarkably, they observe that the third phase is completely unnecessary, and that under Partial Synchrony, the Handover rule can be implemented with 2-phase VPCBC and have linear Communication.

In a nutshell, what they observed is:

> It turns out that handover from a good leader is easier than a bad leader!

Indeed, there are two possibilities.

- Case 1 is that **the preceding leader is non-faulty**, and therefore it succeeds in driving (2-phase) VPCBC to completion. In this case, the next leader learns a lock from $2f+1$ Validators that intersect the commit quorum.

- Case 2 is that **the preceding leader is faulty** and in particular, the VPCBC in the preceding view did not succeed. In this case, the next leader can wait the maximal network delay to learn the highest lock held by any Honest Validator.

Therefore, a leader can implement the Handover rule and discover if it is in case 1 or case 2 as follows.

In each view in HotStuff-2, leaders employ 2-phase VPCBC to make proposals.
When a leader starts, it can guarantee the Handover condition by collecting from Validators their highest known $QC$.
The next leader waits to learn the highest lock by satisfying one of three conditions:

1. The leader obtains a QC from the immediately preceding view.

    : Note that by definition, this QC is the highest possible lock. 

2. The leader obtains a QC from **all** the Validators.

    : Here, the leader trivially learns the highest lock held by any Honest Validator.

3. The leader waits until the maximal delay $\Delta$ has elapsed from when all the Validators have exited the previous view. 

    : Usually, this occurs within $O(\Delta)$ from when the leader itself entered the view. The [View Synchronization sub-protocol](https://malkhi.com/posts/2022/11/pacemakers/) can notify the leader when this is guaranteed. 

Note that implementing the above incurs (still) only linear communication.
In summary, HotStuff-2 reaches agreement under the same conditions as HotStuff, while reducing latency by one third.

#### On Responsiveness and the importance of the third phase.

Importantly, with 2-phase VPCBC, it doesn't always suffice for the leader to collect QCs from a quorum of $2f+1$ validators like (the original) HotStuff. 

To explain why liveness may be lost, consider a view with no commit decision, but with one (or more) Honest Validator holding a lock. A leader's collect-quorum of $2f+1$ Validators doesn't necessarily intersect with the Validator(s) that hold a lock from the previous view. If the leader proposes a transaction that does not extend the lock, an Honest Validator holding the lock may reject the leader proposal.

For this reason, the Handover rule require the leader to learn the highest lock because otherwise.

It might seems that implementing Handover-Responsiveness with 3 phases is more "responsive" than implementing it with 2 phases. However, expiring the previous view inevitably incurs waiting $O(\Delta)$ in Partial Synchrony. Hence, there is no loss in waiting.

It should now be clear why the third phase remains important for VABA.
Responsiveness is the key: as explained in a previous post on VABA](), protocols in the Asynchronous setting must not rely on timers, because there is no known bound on message transmission delays.


